1> On-Demand Instances :- you create instance when you need on the fly. Most costly instance. Most flexible.
     * no upfront cost
     * choose any infrastructure of your choice.
     * Delete after use
     * used when u know i have use instance for a fix amount of time , then i will deleted 
       or when u don't know how much utilisation u need, like u assumed 10 users traffic, but 1000 came so u can choose another infrastructure, then.

* When u create windows or linux instance, cost for 1 minutes is compulsory, even if u use 1 second pay for a minute. After a minute , per second charge is 
  applied. Like if u use it for 80 second, u pay for 80seconds (1min + 20sec) only.
  
* rest other operating system are charged on hourly basis.



2> Reserved Instances :- When u know in advance that atleast specific amt of infrastructure is needed for specifiec amount of time (years).  
        Advantage - upto 72% DISCOUNT

        Factors on which discount depends :-
         1> Operating system
         2> region
         3> Instance type
         4> Tenure  u want to keep instance
         5> If u pay full amount at once, More discount.

    Types of Reserved Instances :-
        1> Convertible :- u can change infrastructure during tenure. 
            -> Extra cost is to be paid
            -> Lesser discount         

        2> Non-Convertible Instances :- More discount


3> SPOT instances (non-reliable) :- These are based on bid system. You bid your price. If it is available u get it. But if anybody bids more than us, it is assigned to sb else. 
                     Their are services like, AWS Spot Fleet or GCP preemptible vm groups to manage spot instances interruptions.

        Advantage :- Upto 90% Discount.

        Use case :- When task are ok if performed in-consistently, and can rerun on failure from where it stopped

                    * Batch processing
                    * Testing and Devlopment environments
                    * Web crawling and Data scrapping
                    * CI/CD pipelines - work that much done will come on jenkins and like this when more is done more will come.


BEST PRACTICE :- Combine spot instances with on-demand or reserved instances for high availability, reduced cost.



--> Shared or Multi-tennant server   V/S    DEDICATED SERVER :-

1> DEDICATE SERVER :-

   You owe the full actual physical infrastructure. no other user is sharing infra.
    uses .....
    These are costlier but can be purcased as reserved instance to save 70%.
   
2> Multi-tennant server :-
    
    Many user uses same physical infrastructure by logical division using Virtualization.





    Two types of Virtualization :-

    a> hvm (hardware virtual machine) :- hypervisor has minimum role in this. Since multiple instances are hosted on same physical infra so hypervisor is necessary but
       with very minimum role to just maintain segmentation. Else user is directly accessing hardware with minimum modification. It can simulate bare metal (simulate). In
        HVM (Hardware Virtual Machine) environments, you do not directly access hardware. Instead, you interact with a virtualized environment that is managed by a hypervisor, but the hypervisor leverages hardware-assisted virtualization features provided by modern CPUs to make virtualization more efficient. ie. u access hardware but with very less modification of hypervisor. HVM uses hardware features like Intel VT-x (Intel Virtualization Technology) or AMD-V (AMD Virtualization) to provide virtualization support directly in the CPU.
These features allow the hypervisor to efficiently run multiple virtual machines (VMs) with near-native performance.

    b> pv (para virtualisation - now rarely used- aws doesn't use) - In this u send request to hypervisor and hypervisor communicate with hardware get results and send u 
       results. Basically u are communicating results with hypervisor's api


* bare metal : Bare Metal refers to physical hardware like servers or computers that run without any virtualization layer or operating system abstraction. 
A hypervisor is a software layer or hardware-software combination that enables multiple operating systems (virtual machines) to run on a single physical host.

    Initially, AWS used the Xen hypervisor.
AWS later developed its own lightweight hypervisor, Nitro, to improve performance and security for its Elastic Compute Cloud (EC2) instances.


____> SAVING PLANS :-

It offers low prices for ec2 instance but in exchange of commitment for consisten amount of usage (measured hourly) for 1 or 3 year term.